Feature/graceful reconfig docs (#29180)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/sql/alter-cluster.md

`ALTER CLUSTER` changes the configuration of a cluster, which **might incur
downtime**. To rename a cluster, use [`ALTER ... RENAME`](/sql/alter-rename/).

## Syntax

#### Set new configuration value

{{< diagram "alter-cluster-set.svg" >}}

#### Reset configuration to original value

{{< diagram "alter-cluster-reset.svg" >}}

### Cluster options

{{% cluster-options %}}

### `with_options`

{{< diagram "alter-cluster-set-with-options.svg" >}}

Field                         | Value                 | Description
------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------------
**WAIT UNTIL READY...TIMEOUT**                   | `duration`            | For a [graceful cluster resizing](#graceful-cluster-resizing), the maximum duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready.
**WAIT UNTIL READY...ON TIMEOUT**                | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | For a [graceful cluster resizing](#graceful-cluster-resizing), the action to take on timeout. <br><ul><li>`COMMIT` cuts over to the new replica regardless of its hydration status, which may lead to downtime.</li><li>`ROLLBACK` removes the pending replica and returns a timeout error.</li></ul>Default: `COMMIT`.

> **WAIT FOR**                  | `duration`            | For a [graceful cluster resizing](#graceful-cluster-resizing), a fixed duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready. This option might lead to downtime, so we recommend using the `WAIT UNTIL READY` option instead.

Reviewer: @jubrad, is there any scenario where we recommend using this option instead of `WAIT UNTIL READY`? This was missing from the option list, but I tried to de-emphasize it.

Author: I think the only time you would use this is if you wanted both sets of replicas up for the exact specified duration. This could be because you want do some sort of comparison between different sizes or something?

Reviewer: Hum, I see. Might be too much work to explain if in the end we expect 99.9% of users to just hit a button in the Console to resize a cluster. I'd leave it as is, but deferring to @kay-kim.

Reviewer 2: This works for me.

{{< diagram "alter-cluster-reset.svg" >}}

### `with_options`

{{< private-preview />}}

{{< diagram "with-options-alter-cluster-set.svg" >}}

> 

Reviewer 2: Should we add a section heading before the next line? because the `{cluster-options}` are for the top level Alter Clusters option, instead of `### with_options` (on line 18).  Either that, or maybe the  `{cluster-options}`  needs to move up?

Author: I think I tried to model this after https://materialize.com/docs/sql/create-source/postgres/#with_options
and a few others. Not to say that they're correct.

It is also possible to add the `with` section to the `alter cluster` diagram.

Reviewer: I'll patch this, too.

{{% cluster-options %}}

> ### `WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY)` options

Reviewer 2: Do we expect people with sources and sinks to use these options as well since they will still experience downtime?  That is, is it better to use in all cases? Or do we want to add a sentence that this is for clusters without sinks and sources? (and link to the example below)?

Author: Yeah, unfortunately, for now, this is only allowed on clusters without a sink or source. All resizes on clusters with sinks or sources will have to use the old mechanism which will cause downtime. 

The new mechanism essentially performs a `create before delete` operation, whereas the old mechanism does a `delete before create`. Sinks and Sources must run on only one replica, so we cannot use the new mechanism.  Currently we'll error during this alter in the same way that we'd error if a customer were to adjust the replication factor on a cluster with sources to be greater than 1.

Field                         | Value                 | Description
------------------------------|-----------------------|-------------------------------------
**TIMEOUT**                   | `duration`            | The maximum duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready.

> **ON TIMEOUT**                | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | The action to take on timeout. `COMMIT` will cutover to the new replicas regardless of their hydration status, which may lead to downtime.  `ROLLBACK` will remove any pending replicas and return a timeout error.

Reviewer 2: Feel free to ignore.

```suggestion
**ON TIMEOUT**                | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | The action to take on timeout.<br><ul><li>`COMMIT` will cutover to the new replicas regardless of their hydration status, which may lead to downtime.</li><li>`ROLLBACK` will remove any pending replicas and return a timeout error.</li></ul>
```

Reviewer 2: Oh ... also, is there a default?

> **ON TIMEOUT**                | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | The action to take on timeout. <br><ul><li>`COMMIT` will cutover to the new replicas regardless of their hydration status, which may lead to downtime.</li><li>`ROLLBACK` will remove any pending replicas and return a timeout error.</li><li>Defaults to `COMMIT`.</li></ul>

Reviewer 2: Just to be consistent with how this page presents all the other Default values:

```suggestion
**ON TIMEOUT** | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | The action to take on timeout. <br><ul><li>`COMMIT` will cutover to the new replicas regardless of their hydration status, which may lead to downtime.</li><li>`ROLLBACK` will remove any pending replicas and return a timeout error.</li></ul>Default: `COMMIT`
```

{{< diagram "alter-cluster-reset.svg" >}}

### `with_options`

> {{< private-preview />}}

Reviewer 2: QQ: w.r.t. the private preview features, can we highlight them in other pages?
For example, in https://materialize.com/docs/concepts/clusters/#sizing-your-clusters, we have 

> Resizing incurs downtime, as it requires all objects in the cluster to hydrate. In the future, it will be possible to resize clusters with no downtime ([#20010](https://github.com/MaterializeInc/materialize/issues/20010)).

Can we mention that this is available as private preview? or do we generally wait until things are out of private preview before mentioning them more broadly in the docs?

Author: I was just about to ask about this! I'm not sure if we should call this out here or wait until we public preview.

Reviewer: @kay-kim, we for sure can. Just be mindful to always include some form of note about it being PrPr.

Reviewer 2: 👍 I'll add a patch that calls it out in our clusters concepts page.

{{< diagram "with-options-alter-cluster-set.svg" >}}

{{% cluster-options %}}

### `WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY)` options
Field                         | Value      | Description
------------------------------|------------|-------------------------------------
**TIMEOUT**                   | `duration` | The maximum duration to wait for the new replicas to be ready.

> **ON TIMEOUT**                | `text`     | The action to take on timeout `COMMIT|ROLLBACK`. ROLLBACK will result in a timeout error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**ON TIMEOUT**                | `text`     | The action to take on timeout `COMMIT\|ROLLBACK`. `ROLLBACK` will result in a timeout error.
```

Q: what happens on commit if we time out waiting for the new replicas to be ready? Is it that it's the old ungraceful behavior ... such that there is downtime?

Author: Exactly! I've updated the description here. Let me know if adds the appropriate clarity.

> **ON TIMEOUT**                | `text`     | The action to take on timeout `COMMIT|ROLLBACK`. ROLLBACK will result in a timeout error.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**ON TIMEOUT**                | [`COMMIT`,`ROLLBACK`] | The action to take on timeout. `ROLLBACK` will result in a timeout error.
```

or [`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`](../create-materialized-view/#refresh-strategies)
for more details on scheduled clusters.

### No-downtime reconfiguration

{{< private-preview />}}
Changing the configuration of a cluster using the `ALTER CLUSTER` command
requires the cluster to restart, which incurs **downtime**. For clusters that
don't contain sources or sinks, you can use the `WAIT UNTIL READY` option to
perform a graceful reconfiguration, which spins up an additional cluster
replica under the covers with the desired new configuration, waits for the
replica to be hydrated, and then replaces the original replica. This allows you
to perform operations like cluster resizing with **no downtime**.

```sql
ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (SIZE '100CC') WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY (TIMEOUT = '10m', ON TIMEOUT = 'COMMIT'))
````

> The `ALTER` statement will block while the new replica becomes ready, which
> could take as long as the specified timeout. During this operation, any other
> reconfiguration command will block, and any connection interruption or
> statement cancelation will cause a rollback — no configuration changes will
> take effect in that case.

Reviewer 2: QQ: Is it that the statement blocks all? or just other reconfiguration commands?  If first, is it more (feel free to ignore suggestion)

```suggestion
The `ALTER CLUSTER` statement will block any other reconfiguration commands
while the new replica becomes ready. This could take as long as the specified
timeout. During the operation, any connection interruption or statement
cancelation will cause a rollback; i.e., no configuration changes from the
statement will take effect.
```

Author: Interesting... both?

The statement will block as in it will not return until the command has succeeded, but it will also prevent reconfiguration of the cluster while it's executing.

Author: I also updated the text here to spell that out a little more clearly.

or [`CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW`](../create-materialized-view/#refresh-strategies)
for more details on scheduled clusters.

> ### Reconfiguring Without Downtime

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### No-downtime reconfiguration
```

Reviewer: I quite like "graceful reconfiguration".

Author: I was also thinking `Zero downtime resize`
I was avoiding graceful reconfig as it was more of an internal name,  but if We're cool with it I also like it.

{{< private-preview />}}

With `WAIT UNTIL READY` alter statements will spin up pending cluster replicas and wait until they are hydrated
before cutting over. This eliminates downtime during cluster updates such as resizing.

```sql
ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (SIZE '100CC') WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY (TIMEOUT = '10m', ON TIMEOUT = 'COMMIT'))
```

This statement will block while the pending replicas become ready, which could be as long as the specified timeout. Any interruption

> of the connection or cancelation of the statement will cause a `ROLLBACK`. The cluster will be blocked from modificatoin while a reconfiguraiton

Reviewer 2: just some typos:

```suggestion
of the connection or cancelation of the statement will cause a `ROLLBACK`. The cluster will be blocked from modification while a reconfiguration
```

> With `WAIT UNTIL READY` alter statements will spin up pending cluster replicas and wait until they are hydrated
> before cutting over. This eliminates downtime during cluster updates such as resizing.
> 
> ```sql
> ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (SIZE '100CC') WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY (TIMEOUT = '10m', ON TIMEOUT = 'COMMIT'))
> ```
> 
> This statement will block while the pending replicas become ready, which could be as long as the specified timeout. Any interruption
> of the connection or cancelation of the statement will cause a `ROLLBACK`. The cluster will be blocked from modificatoin while a reconfiguraiton
> is ongoing. All replicas consume credits during this action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Changing the configuration of a cluster using the `ALTER CLUSTER` command
requires the cluster to restart, which incurs **downtime**. For clusters that
don't contain sources or sinks, you can use the `WAIT UNTIL READY` option to
perform a graceful reconfiguration, which spins up an additional cluster
replica under the covers with the desired new configuration, waits for the
replica to be hydrated, and then replaces the original replica. This allows you
to perform operations like cluster resizing with **no downtime**.

```sql
ALTER CLUSTER c1 SET (SIZE '100CC') WITH (WAIT UNTIL READY (TIMEOUT = '10m', ON TIMEOUT = 'COMMIT'))
```

The `ALTER` statement will block while the new replica becomes ready, which
could take as long as the specified timeout. During this operation, any other
reconfiguration command will block, and any connection interruption or
statement cancelation will cause a rollback — no configuration changes will
take effect in that case.
```
